Fine-tuning Florence-2 - Microsoft's Cutting-edge Vision Language Models (#2160)
huggingface/blog: finetune-florence2.md

Reviewer: We need an entry in `_blog.yml` too.

Reviewer 2: yep we are fixing bunch of other things before doing it

The dataset creation process was largely automated. The authors used off-the-shelf task-specific models and a set of heuristics and quality checks to clean the obtained results. The result was a new dataset containing over 5 billion annotations for 126 million images, which was used to pre-train the Florence-2 model.
## Original performance on VQA

We experimented with various methods to adapt the model for VQA (Visual Question Answering) responses. The most effective approach we found was region-to-description prompting, though it doesn't fully align with VQA tasks. Captioning provides descriptive information about the image but doesn't allow for direct question input.
We also tested several "unsupported" prompts such as "<VQA>", "<vqa>", and "<Visual question answering>". Unfortunately, these attempts yielded unusable results.

> # Performance on DocVQA after fine-tuning

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Performance on DocVQA after fine-tuning
```

        outputs = model(input_ids=input_ids, pixel_values=pixel_values, labels=labels)
        loss = outputs.loss
        loss.backward()
        optimizer.step()
        lr_scheduler.step()
        optimizer.zero_grad()
        train_loss += loss.item()
    avg_train_loss = train_loss / len(train_loader)
    print(f"Average Training Loss: {avg_train_loss}")

    model.eval()
    val_loss = 0
    with torch.no_grad():
        for batch in tqdm(val_loader, desc=f"Validation Epoch {epoch + 1}/{epochs}"):
            inputs, answers = batch
            input_ids = inputs["input_ids"]
            pixel_values = inputs["pixel_values"]
            labels = processor.tokenizer(text=answers, return_tensors="pt", padding=True, return_token_type_ids=False).input_ids.to(device)
            outputs = model(input_ids=input_ids, pixel_values=pixel_values, labels=labels)
            loss = outputs.loss
            val_loss += loss.item()

      print(val_loss / len(val_loader))
```

You can save the model and processor by calling `save_pretrained()` on both objects. The resulting model is here. 

> [Maybe we could embed the docvqa Space here too?]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<script
	type="module"
	src="https://gradio.s3-us-west-2.amazonaws.com/3.23.0/gradio.js"></script>

<gradio-app theme_mode="light" src="https://andito-Florence-2-DocVQA.hf.space"></gradio-app>
```

> ##Useful Resources

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Useful Resources

```

> [Vision Language Models Explained] (https://huggingface.co/blog/vlms)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [Vision Language Models Explained] (https://huggingface.co/blog/vlms)
```

> [Notebook for Florence-2 Inference] (https://huggingface.co/microsoft/Florence-2-large/blob/main/sample_inference.ipynb)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [Notebook for Florence-2 Inference] (https://huggingface.co/microsoft/Florence-2-large/blob/main/sample_inference.ipynb)
```

> [Florence-2 Demo] (https://huggingface.co/spaces/gokaygo

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [Florence-2 Demo] (https://huggingface.co/spaces/gokaygo
```

## Fine-tuning Details
The authors utilized a batch size of 2048 for their base model and 3072 for the large model. In our experiments, we adapted this approach to a lower-resource setup. Specifically, we froze the vision encoder and used a batch size of 6 on a single A100 GPU in Colab, or a batch size of 1 with a T4. The authors also reported an improvement in performance when fine-tuning with an unfrozen image encoder compared to freezing it.
In parallel, we conducted an experiment with more resources, fine-tuning the entire model with a batch size of 64. This training process took 70 minutes on a cluster equipped with 8 H100 GPUs.
[Maybe we could give links to all the models here]
In every case, we found a small learning rate of 1e-6 to be beneficial for training. With larger learning rates the model will quickly overfit the training set.
## Code Walkthrough

> You can find the notebook that includes the code [here](notebook-link-from-github-to-colab). We will fine-tune [Florence-2-base-ft](https://huggingface.co/microsoft/Florence-2-base-ft) checkpoint on [DocVQA](https://huggingface.co/datasets/HuggingFaceM4/DocumentVQA) dataset.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can find the notebook that includes the notebook [here](https://colab.research.google.com/drive/1hKDrJ5AH_o7I95PtZ9__VlCTNAo1Gjpf?usp=sharing). We will fine-tune [Florence-2-base-ft](https://huggingface.co/microsoft/Florence-2-base-ft) checkpoint on [DocVQA](https://huggingface.co/datasets/HuggingFaceM4/DocumentVQA) dataset.
```

The model has a simple structure. It utilizes a DaViT vision encoder to convert images into visual embeddings and BERT to convert text prompts into text and location embeddings. The resulting embeddings are then processed by a standard encoder-decoder transformer architecture, generating text and location tokens.
Florence-2's strength doesn't stem from its architecture, but from the massive dataset it was pre-trained on. The authors noted that leading computer vision datasets typically contain limited information - WIT only includes image/caption pairs, SA-1B only contains images and associated segmentation masks. Therefore, they decided to build a new FLD-5B dataset containing a wide range of information about each image - boxes, masks, captions, and grounding.
The dataset creation process was largely automated. The authors used off-the-shelf task-specific models and a set of heuristics and quality checks to clean the obtained results. The result was a new dataset containing over 5 billion annotations for 126 million images, which was used to pre-train the Florence-2 model.
## Original performance on VQA

> We experimented with various methods to adapt the model for VQA (Visual Question Answering) responses. The most effective approach we found was region-to-description prompting, though it doesn't fully align with VQA tasks. Captioning provides descriptive information about the image but doesn't allow for direct question input.

Author: It's not, but the model works with some prompts to address each task. We thought maybe VQA was a task they trained on so we tried to reverse engineer it.

We also tested several "unsupported" prompts such as "<VQA>", "<vqa>", and "<Visual question answering>". Unfortunately, these attempts yielded unusable results.

## Performance on DocVQA after fine-tuning

We measure performance using the [Levenshtein's similarity](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Levenshtein_distance), the standard metric for this dataset. Initially, before fine-tuning, the similarity between the model's predictions and the ground truth on the validation dataset was 0, as the model's outputs were not close to the ground truth. After fine-tuning with the training set for seven epochs, the similarity score on the validation set improved to 57.0.

> We created a 🤗 [space](https://huggingface.co/spaces/andito/Florence-2-DocVQA) to demo the fine-tuned model. While the model performs well for DocVQA, it still struggles with more general document understanding and isn't very chatty. However, it clearly accomplishes the tasks, demonstrating the significant potential for fine-tuning Florence-2 for downstream tasks. To create a great VQA model, we suggest further fine-tuning Florence-2 using [the cauldron](https://huggingface.co/datasets/HuggingFaceM4/the_cauldron), and already provide the implemented code on our GitHub page.

Author: rephrased this

## Fine-tuning Details
The authors utilized a batch size of 2048 for their base model and 3072 for the large model. In our experiments, we adapted this approach to a lower-resource setup. Specifically, we froze the vision encoder and used a batch size of 6 on a single A100 GPU in Colab, or a batch size of 1 with a T4. The authors also reported an improvement in performance when fine-tuning with an unfrozen image encoder compared to freezing it.
In parallel, we conducted an experiment with more resources, fine-tuning the entire model with a batch size of 64. This training process took 70 minutes on a cluster equipped with 8 H100 GPUs.

> [Maybe we could give links to all the models here]

Reviewer: Also, did you explore gradient accumulation?

> [Maybe we could give links to all the models here]

Reviewer 2: we didn't do gradient accumulation, I think @andimarafioti ran evals

> [Maybe we could give links to all the models here]

Author: Added the model link

In every case, we found a small learning rate of 1e-6 to be beneficial for training. With larger learning rates the model will quickly overfit the training set.
## Code Walkthrough
You can find the notebook that includes the notebook [here](https://colab.research.google.com/drive/1hKDrJ5AH_o7I95PtZ9__VlCTNAo1Gjpf?usp=sharing). We will fine-tune [Florence-2-base-ft](https://huggingface.co/microsoft/Florence-2-base-ft) checkpoint on [DocVQA](https://huggingface.co/datasets/HuggingFaceM4/DocumentVQA) dataset.
Let's start by installing the dependencies.

```python
!pip install -q datasets flash_attn timm einops
```

Load the DocVQA dataset from Hugging Face Hub.

```python

> import torch from datasets import load_dataset 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
import torch
from datasets import load_dataset 
```

> data = load_dataset("HuggingFaceM4/DocumentVQA")

Reviewer: ```suggestion

data = load_dataset("HuggingFaceM4/DocumentVQA")
```

```

> We can load the model using `AutoModelForCausalLM` and the processor using `AutoProcessor` classes of transformers library. Note that we need to pass `trust_remote_code` as `True` since this model is not a transformers model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can load the model and processor using the `AutoModelForCausalLM` and `AutoProcessor` classes from the transformers library. We need to pass `trust_remote_code=True` because the model uses custom code – it has not been natively integrated into transformers yet.
```

```python
from transformers import AutoModelForCausalLM, AutoProcessor
import torch

device = torch.device("cuda" if torch.cuda.is_available() else "cpu") 

> model = AutoModelForCausalLM.from_pretrained("microsoft/Florence-2-base-ft", trust_remote_code=True, revision='refs/pr/6').to(device) 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
model = AutoModelForCausalLM.from_pretrained(
    "microsoft/Florence-2-base-ft",
    trust_remote_code=True,
    revision='refs/pr/6'
).to(device) 
```

A short explanation about the use of a custom branch could be helpful.

> processor = AutoProcessor.from_pretrained("microsoft/Florence-2-base-ft", trust_remote_code=True, revision='refs/pr/6')

Reviewer: I'd also split in multiple lines because the page width is not large.

Author: done

```

> Let's do inference with our dataset first to see how the model performs already with our dataset before fine-tuning.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's run inference on the dataset to see how the model performs before fine-tuning.
```

```python
# a document

> image = data['train'][3]['image']

Reviewer: maybe we could show the image

> prompt = "DocVQA" + "What do you see in this image?" # task prefix with question

Reviewer: is there no separator after the prefix? Should it be `<DocVQA>`? Why use a prefix if the model has not been fine-tuned?

Author: There is actually, I added it

inputs = processor(text=prompt, images=image, return_tensors="pt").to(device) 

> generated_ids = model.generate( input_ids=inputs["input_ids"], pixel_values=inputs["pixel_values"], max_new_tokens=1024, num_beams=3 ) generated_text = processor.batch_decode(generated_ids, skip_special_tokens=False)[0]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
generated_ids = model.generate(
    input_ids=inputs["input_ids"],
    pixel_values=inputs["pixel_values"],
    max_new_tokens=1024,
    num_beams=3,
)
generated_text = processor.batch_decode(generated_ids, skip_special_tokens=False)[0]
```

does `model.generate(**inputs, ...)` work?

print(processor.post_process_generation(generated_text, task=task_prompt, image_size=(image.width, image.height)))

> # {'DocVQA': '499150498'}

Reviewer: I don't understand what this means

Reviewer 2: sorry I think we should remove this. we already added an example before FT, this was to demonstrate that it doesn't work well

Author: Agreed, removed it

```

> We need to construct our dataset. Note how we are adding a new task prefix `<DocVQA>` before the question when constructing the prompt.

Reviewer: Let's now fine-tune the model! We'll build a training PyTorch Dataset in which we'll prepend a `<DocVQA>` prefix to each question from the dataset.

```python
import torch from torch.utils.data import Dataset 

class DocVQADataset(Dataset): 

    def __init__(self, data): 

>         self.data = data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        self.data = data
        
```

    def __len__(self): 

>         return len(self.data)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        return len(self.data)
        
```

    def __getitem__(self, idx):

>         example = self.data[idx] question = "<DocVQA>" + example['question'] 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        example = self.data[idx]
        question = "<DocVQA>" + example['question'] 
```

        first_answer = example['answers'][0]

>         image = example['image']  
>         if image.mode != "RGB":
>             image = image.convert("RGB")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        image = example['image'].convert("RGB")
```

maybe?

        return question, first_answer, image
```

> Let's get to fine-tuning. We will create our dataset, the data collator, and start training. In A100 with 40GB memory, we can fit in 6 examples. If you're training on T4, you can use batch size of 1.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We'll now build the data collator that builds training batches from the dataset samples, and start training. In A100 with 40GB memory, we can fit in 6 examples. If you're training on T4, you can use a batch size of 1.
```

```python
import os 
from torch.utils.data import DataLoader
from tqdm import tqdm 

> from transformers import (AdamW, AutoProcessor, get_scheduler)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
from transformers import AdamW, get_scheduler
```

def collate_fn(batch): 
    questions, answers, images = zip(*batch)
    inputs = processor(text=list(questions), images=list(images), return_tensors="pt", padding=True).to(device)
    return inputs, answers 

train_dataset = DocVQADataset(data['train'])
val_dataset = DocVQADataset(data['validation']) 
batch_size = 6
num_workers = 0

train_loader = DataLoader(train_dataset, batch_size=batch_size, collate_fn=collate_fn, num_workers=num_workers, shuffle=True)

> val_loader = DataLoader(val_dataset, batch_size=batch_size, collate_fn=collate_fn, num_workers=num_workers)

Reviewer: maybe multiline too

Author: applied

```

We can train the model now.

```python

> epochs = 2

Reviewer: Didn't we mention 7 above?

Author: Changed

> optimizer = AdamW(model.parameters(), lr=1e-6)

Reviewer: Where are we freezing the vision encoder?

Author: Added it to the code

num_training_steps = epochs * len(train_loader)

> lr_scheduler = get_scheduler(name="linear", optimizer=optimizer, num_warmup_steps=0, num_training_steps=num_training_steps,)

Reviewer: multi-line?

Author: done

for epoch in range(epochs): 
    model.train() 
    train_loss = 0
    i = -1

>     for batch in tqdm(train_loader, desc=f"Training Epoch {epoch + 1}/{epochs}"):
>         i += 1
>         inputs, answers = batch

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    for inputs, answers in tqdm(train_loader, desc=f"Training Epoch {epoch + 1}/{epochs}"):
        i += 1
```

>         input_ids = inputs["input_ids"] pixel_values = inputs["pixel_values"] 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        input_ids = inputs["input_ids"]
        pixel_values = inputs["pixel_values"] 
```

        labels = processor.tokenizer(text=answers, return_tensors="pt", padding=True, return_token_type_ids=False).input_ids.to(device)
        outputs = model(input_ids=input_ids, pixel_values=pixel_values, labels=labels)
        loss = outputs.loss
        loss.backward()
        optimizer.step()
        lr_scheduler.step()
        optimizer.zero_grad()
        train_loss += loss.item()
    avg_train_loss = train_loss / len(train_loader)
    print(f"Average Training Loss: {avg_train_loss}")

    model.eval()
    val_loss = 0
    with torch.no_grad():
        for batch in tqdm(val_loader, desc=f"Validation Epoch {epoch + 1}/{epochs}"):
            inputs, answers = batch
            input_ids = inputs["input_ids"]
            pixel_values = inputs["pixel_values"]
            labels = processor.tokenizer(text=answers, return_tensors="pt", padding=True, return_token_type_ids=False).input_ids.to(device)
            outputs = model(input_ids=input_ids, pixel_values=pixel_values, labels=labels)
            loss = outputs.loss
            val_loss += loss.item()

      print(val_loss / len(val_loader))
```

> You can save the model and processor by calling `save_pretrained()` on both objects. The resulting model is here. 

Reviewer: Maybe also link to the model itself.

Author: added

<script
	type="module"
	src="https://gradio.s3-us-west-2.amazonaws.com/3.23.0/gradio.js"></script>

<gradio-app theme_mode="light" src="https://andito-Florence-2-DocVQA.hf.space"></gradio-app>

> ## Useful Resources

Reviewer: I'd maybe add a small Conclusion section and invite people to submit their own tasks :)

Author: Added conclusions

- [Vision Language Models Explained](https://huggingface.co/blog/vlms)
- [Notebook for Florence-2 Inference](https://huggingface.co/microsoft/Florence-2-large/blob/main/sample_inference.ipynb)
- [Florence-2 DocVQA Demo](https://huggingface.co/spaces/andito/Florence-2-DocVQA)

> - [Florence-2 Demo](https://huggingface.co/spaces/gokaygo)

Reviewer: Also link to the fine-tuning notebook

Author: Added it!
